instructions/dp-200-05_instructions.md, before:

﻿# DP 200 - Implementing a Data Platform Solution
# Lab 5 - Working with Relational Data Stores in the Cloud

**Estimated Time**: 75 minutes

**Pre-requisites**: It is assumed that the case study for this lab has already been read. It is assumed that the content and lab for module 1: Azure for the Data Engineer has also been completed

**Lab files**: The files for this lab are located in the _Allfiles\Labfiles\Starter\DP-200.5_ folder.

## Lab overview

The students will be able to provision an Azure SQL Database and Azure SQL Data Warehouse and be able to issue queries against one of the instances that are created. They will be also be able to integrate SQL Data Warehouse with a number of other Data platform technologies and use PolyBase to load data from one data source into Azure SQL Data Warehouse.

## Lab objectives
  
After completing this lab, you will be able to:

1. Use Azure SQL Database
1. Describe Azure Data Warehouse
1. Creating and Querying an Azure SQL Data Warehouse
1. Using PolyBase to Load Data into Azure SQL Data Warehouse

## Scenario
  
You are the senior data engineer at AdventureWorks, and you are working with your team to transition relational database systems from on-premises SQL Servers to relational database located in Azure. You will begin by creating an instance of SQL Server with the company's sample database that will be handed of the junior data engineers to perform some testing of departmental databases.

You will then provision a SQL Data Warehouse and test that the provisioning of the server is successful by testing a sample database with a series of queries. You will then use PolyBase to load dimension tables from Azure Blob and Azure Databricks to test that the integration of these data platform technologies with Azure SQL Data Warehouse.

At the end of this lad, you will have:

1. Use Azure SQL Database
1. Describe Azure Data Warehouse
1. Creating and Querying an Azure SQL Data Warehouse
1. Using PolyBase to Load Data into Azure SQL Data Warehouse

> **IMPORTANT**: As you go through this lab, make a note of any issue(s) that you have encountered in any provisioning or configuration tasks and log it in the table in the document located at _\Labfiles\DP-200-Issues-Doc.docx_. Document the Lab number, note the technology, Describe the issue, and what was the resolution. Save this document as you will refer back to it in a later module.

## Exercise 1: Use Azure SQL Database

Estimated Time: 15 minutes

Individual exercise
  
The main task for this exercise are as follows:

1. Create and configure a SQL Database instance.

### Task 1: Create and configure a SQL Database instance.

1. In the Azure portal, navigate to the **+ Create a resource** blade.

1. In the New blade, navigate to the **Search the Marketplace** text box, and type the word **SQL Database**. Click **SQL Database** in the list that appears.

1. In the **SQL Database** blade, click **Create**.

1. From the **Create SQL Database** blade, create an Azure SQL Database with the following settings:

    - Subscription: the name of the subscription you are using in this lab

    - Resource group name: **awrgstudxx**, where **xx** are your initials.

    - Database name: In **Additional setting** tab, under data source, click **Sample** . The AdventureworksLT sample database is selected automatically.

    - Server: Create a new server by clicking **Create new** with the following settings and click on **OK**:
        - Server name: **SQLServicexx**, where **xx** are your initials
        - Server admin login: **xxsqladmin**, where **xx** are your initials
        - Password: **Pa55w.rd**
        - Confirm Password: **Pa55w.rd**
        - Location: choose a **location** near to you.
        - Allow Azure services to access server: **checked**

    - Click on **Additional settings** tab, under **Data Source**, click on **Sample**.

    - Leave the remaining settings to their defaults

1. In the **Create SQL Database*** blade, click **Review + create**.

1. After the validation of the **Create SQL Database*** blade, click **Create**.

   > **Note**: The provision will takes approximately 4 minutes.

> **Result**: After you completed this exercise, you have an Azure SQL Database instance

## Exercise 2: Describe Azure Data Warehouse
  
Estimated Time: 15 minutes

Individual exercise
  
The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Create and configure a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. Configure the Server Firewall

### Task 1: Create and configure a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. In the Azure portal, navigate to the **+ Create a resource** blade.

1. In the New blade, navigate to the **Search the Marketplace** text box, and type the word **SQL Data**. Click **SQL Data Warehouse** in the list that appears.

1. In the **SQL Data Warehouse** blade, click **Create**.

1. From the **SQL Data Warehouse** blade, create an Azure SQL Data Warehouse with the following settings:

    - Database name: **Warehousexx**, where **xx** are your initials.

    - Subscription: the name of the subscription you are using in this lab

    - Resource group name: **awrgstudxx**, where **xx** are your initials.
    - Server: **SQLServicexx**

    - Performance Level: **Gen2 DW100C**

    - Select Source: In **Additional setting** tab, under data source, click **Sample**


1. In the **SQL Data Warehouse*** blade, click **Create**.

   > **Note**: The provision will takes approximately 7 minutes.

### Task 2: Configure the Server Firewall

1. In the Azure portal, in the blade, click **Resource groups**, and then click **awrgstudxx**, and then click on **awdlsstudxx**, where **xx** are your initials

1. Click on **sqlservicexx**, where **xx** are your initials.

1. In the **sqlservicexx** screen, click on **Firewalls and virtual networks**.

1. In the sqlservicexx - Firewalls and virtual networks screen, click on the option **+ Add client IP**, and then click on **Save**.

    > **Note**: You will receive a message stating that the the server firewall rules have been successfully updated

> **Result**: After you completed this exercise, you have created an Azure SQL Data Warehouse instance and configures the server firewall to enable connections against it.

## Exercise 3: Creating an Azure SQL Data Warehouse

Estimated Time: 25 minutes

Individual exercise

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Install SQL Server Management Studio and connect to a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. Create a SQL Data Warehouse database

1. Create SQL Data Warehouse tables

    > **Note**: If you are not familiar with Transact-SQL, statements are available for the following labs in the following location **Allfiles\Labfiles\Starter\DP-200.5\SQL DW Files**

### Task 1: Install SQL Server Management Studio and connect to a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. In the Azure Portal, in the **sqlservicexx - Firewalls and virtual networks**, in the blade, click on **Properties**

1. Copy the **"Server name"** and paste it into Notepad.

1. Download [SQL Server Management Studio](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssms/download-sql-server-management-studio-ssms?view=sql-server-2017) and install onto your machine

1. On the windows desktop, click on the **Start**, and type **"SQL Server"** and then click on **MIcrosoft SQL Server Management Studio 17**

1. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, fill in the following details
    - Server Name: **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net**
    - Authentication: **SQL Server Authentication**
    - Username: **xxsqladmin**
    - Password: **P@ssw0rd**

1. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, click **Connect** 

### Task 2: Create a SQL Data Warehouse database.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**. 

1. In the query window, create a DataWarehouse database named **DWDB**, with a service objective of DW100 and a maximum size of 1024GB.

    ```SQL
    CREATE DATABASE DWDB COLLATE SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS
    (
        EDITION 			= 'DataWarehouse'
    ,	SERVICE_OBJECTIVE 	= 'DW100C'
    ,	MAXSIZE 			= 1024 GB
    );
    ```

    > **Note**: The creation of the database takes approximately 2 minutes.

1. In the **awdlsstudxx** blade, click on **Access keys**, and then clilck on the copy icon next to the **Storage account name** and paste it into Notepad.

### Task 3: Create SQL Data Warehouse tables.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**.

    >**Note**: If you are unfamiliar with Transact-SQL, there is a script in the Allfiles\Solution\DP-200.5\folder named **Exercise3 Task3Step2 script.sql**. It contains the bulk of the code required to create the tables, but you do have to complete the code by selecting the distribution type to use for each table 

1. Create a table named **dbo.Users** with a **clustered columnstore** index with a distribution of **replicate** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | userId | int | NULL|
    | City | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Region | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Country | nvarchar(100) | NULL|

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**.

1. Create a table named **dbo.Products** with a **clustered columnstore** index with a distribution of **round robin** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | ProductId | int | NULL|
    | EnglishProductName | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Color | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | StandardCost | int | NULL|
    | ListPrice | int | NULL|
    | Size | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Weight | int | NULL|
    | DaysToManufacture | int | NULL|
    | Class | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Style | nvarchar(100) | NULL|

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**.

1. Create a table named **dbo.FactSales** with a **clustered columnstore** index with a distribution of **Hash** on the **SalesUnit** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | DateId | int | NULL|
    | ProductId | int | NULL|
    | UserId | int | NULL|
    | UserPreferenceId | int | NULL|
    | SalesUnit | int | NULL|

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, click on **Execute**.

> **Result**: After you completed this exercise, you have installed SQL Server Management Studio to create a data warhouse named DWDB and three tables named Users, Products and FactSales.

## Exercise 4: Using PolyBase to Load Data into Azure SQL Data Warehouse

Estimated Time: 10 minutes

Individual exercise

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Collect Azure Blob container and key details

1. Create a dbo.Dates table using PolyBase from Azure Blob


### Task 1: Collect Azure Blob account name and key details

1. In the Azure portal, click on **Resource groups** and then click on **awrgstudxx**, and then click on **awsastudxx** where xx are the initials of your name.

1. In the **awsastudxx** screen, click **Access keys**. Click on the icon next to the **Storage account name** and paste it into Notepad.

1. In the **awsastudxx - Access keys** screen, under **key1**, Click on the icon next to the **Key** and paste it into Notepad.

### Task 2: Create a dbo.Dates table using PolyBase from Azure Blob

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**.

1. Create a **master key** against the **DWDB** database.

    ```SQL
    CREATE MASTER KEY;
    ```

1. Create a database scoped credential named **AzureStorageCredential** with the following details:
    - IDENTITY: **MOCID**
    - SECRET: **The access key of your storage account**

    ```SQL
    CREATE DATABASE SCOPED CREDENTIAL AzureStorageCredential
    WITH
    IDENTITY = 'MOCID',
    SECRET = 'Your storage account key'
;
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight both statements and then click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in code that will create an external data source named **AzureStorage** for the Blob storage account and data container created in with a type of **HADOOP** that makes use of the ****AzureStorageCredential**

    ```SQL
    CREATE EXTERNAL DATA SOURCE AzureStorage
    WITH (
        TYPE = HADOOP,
        LOCATION = 'wasbs://data@awsastudxx.blob.core.windows.net',
        CREDENTIAL = AzureStorageCredential
    );
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in code that will create an external file format named **TextFile** with a formattype of **DelimitedText** and a filed terminator of **comma**.

    ```SQL
    CREATE EXTERNAL FILE FORMAT TextFile
    WITH (
        FORMAT_TYPE = DelimitedText,
        FORMAT_OPTIONS (FIELD_TERMINATOR = ',')
    );
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight the statement and then click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in code that will create an external table named **dbo.DimDate2External** with the **location** as the root file, the Data source as **AzureStorage**, the File_format of **TextFile** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | Date | datetime2(3) | NULL|
    | DateKey | decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | MonthKey | decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | Month | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Quarter | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Year | decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | Year-Quarter | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Year-Month | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Year-MonthKey | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | WeekDayKey| decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | WeekDay| nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Day Of Month| decimal(38, 0) | NULL|

    ```SQL
    CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE dbo.DimDate2External (
	[Date] datetime2(3) NULL,
	[DateKey] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[MonthKey] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[Month] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Quarter] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Year] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[Year-Quarter] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Year-Month] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Year-MonthKey] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[WeekDayKey] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[WeekDay] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Day Of Month] decimal(38, 0) NULL
    )
    WITH (
        LOCATION='/',
        DATA_SOURCE=AzureStorage,
        FILE_FORMAT=TextFile
    );
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight the statement and then click on **Execute**.

1. Test that the table is created by running a select statement against it

    ```SQL
    SELECT * FROM dbo.DimDate2External;
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in a **CTAS** statement that creates a table named **dbo.Dates** with a **columnstore** index and a **distribution** of **round robin** that loads data from the **dbo.DimDate2External** table.

    ```SQL
    CREATE TABLE dbo.Dates
    WITH
    (   
        CLUSTERED COLUMNSTORE INDEX,
        DISTRIBUTION = ROUND_ROBIN
    )
    AS
    SELECT * FROM [dbo].[DimDate2External];
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight the statement and then click on **Execute**.
 
1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in a query that creates statistics on the **DateKey**, **Quarter** and **Month** column.

    ```SQL
    CREATE STATISTICS [DateKey] on [Dates] ([DateKey]);
    CREATE STATISTICS [Quarter] on [Dates] ([Quarter]);
    CREATE STATISTICS [Month] on [Dates] ([Month]);
    ```

1. Test that the table is created by running a select statement against it

    ```SQL
    SELECT * FROM dbo.Dates;
    ```

Commit message:

Scripts and table creation should be in the DWDB
The script, that is creating the tables should be executed in the DWDB database, otherwise the default steps will execute the query in the master database context. This makes them fail with a very misleading error "Syntax error near REPLICATION"

instructions/dp-200-05_instructions.md, after:

﻿# DP 200 - Implementing a Data Platform Solution
# Lab 5 - Working with Relational Data Stores in the Cloud

**Estimated Time**: 75 minutes

**Pre-requisites**: It is assumed that the case study for this lab has already been read. It is assumed that the content and lab for module 1: Azure for the Data Engineer has also been completed

**Lab files**: The files for this lab are located in the _Allfiles\Labfiles\Starter\DP-200.5_ folder.

## Lab overview

The students will be able to provision an Azure SQL Database and Azure SQL Data Warehouse and be able to issue queries against one of the instances that are created. They will be also be able to integrate SQL Data Warehouse with a number of other Data platform technologies and use PolyBase to load data from one data source into Azure SQL Data Warehouse.

## Lab objectives
  
After completing this lab, you will be able to:

1. Use Azure SQL Database
1. Describe Azure Data Warehouse
1. Creating and Querying an Azure SQL Data Warehouse
1. Using PolyBase to Load Data into Azure SQL Data Warehouse

## Scenario
  
You are the senior data engineer at AdventureWorks, and you are working with your team to transition relational database systems from on-premises SQL Servers to relational database located in Azure. You will begin by creating an instance of SQL Server with the company's sample database that will be handed of the junior data engineers to perform some testing of departmental databases.

You will then provision a SQL Data Warehouse and test that the provisioning of the server is successful by testing a sample database with a series of queries. You will then use PolyBase to load dimension tables from Azure Blob and Azure Databricks to test that the integration of these data platform technologies with Azure SQL Data Warehouse.

At the end of this lad, you will have:

1. Use Azure SQL Database
1. Describe Azure Data Warehouse
1. Creating and Querying an Azure SQL Data Warehouse
1. Using PolyBase to Load Data into Azure SQL Data Warehouse

> **IMPORTANT**: As you go through this lab, make a note of any issue(s) that you have encountered in any provisioning or configuration tasks and log it in the table in the document located at _\Labfiles\DP-200-Issues-Doc.docx_. Document the Lab number, note the technology, Describe the issue, and what was the resolution. Save this document as you will refer back to it in a later module.

## Exercise 1: Use Azure SQL Database

Estimated Time: 15 minutes

Individual exercise
  
The main task for this exercise are as follows:

1. Create and configure a SQL Database instance.

### Task 1: Create and configure a SQL Database instance.

1. In the Azure portal, navigate to the **+ Create a resource** blade.

1. In the New blade, navigate to the **Search the Marketplace** text box, and type the word **SQL Database**. Click **SQL Database** in the list that appears.

1. In the **SQL Database** blade, click **Create**.

1. From the **Create SQL Database** blade, create an Azure SQL Database with the following settings:

    - Subscription: the name of the subscription you are using in this lab

    - Resource group name: **awrgstudxx**, where **xx** are your initials.

    - Database name: In **Additional setting** tab, under data source, click **Sample** . The AdventureworksLT sample database is selected automatically.

    - Server: Create a new server by clicking **Create new** with the following settings and click on **OK**:
        - Server name: **SQLServicexx**, where **xx** are your initials
        - Server admin login: **xxsqladmin**, where **xx** are your initials
        - Password: **Pa55w.rd**
        - Confirm Password: **Pa55w.rd**
        - Location: choose a **location** near to you.
        - Allow Azure services to access server: **checked**

    - Click on **Additional settings** tab, under **Data Source**, click on **Sample**.

    - Leave the remaining settings to their defaults

1. In the **Create SQL Database*** blade, click **Review + create**.

1. After the validation of the **Create SQL Database*** blade, click **Create**.

   > **Note**: The provision will takes approximately 4 minutes.

> **Result**: After you completed this exercise, you have an Azure SQL Database instance

## Exercise 2: Describe Azure Data Warehouse
  
Estimated Time: 15 minutes

Individual exercise
  
The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Create and configure a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. Configure the Server Firewall

### Task 1: Create and configure a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. In the Azure portal, navigate to the **+ Create a resource** blade.

1. In the New blade, navigate to the **Search the Marketplace** text box, and type the word **SQL Data**. Click **SQL Data Warehouse** in the list that appears.

1. In the **SQL Data Warehouse** blade, click **Create**.

1. From the **SQL Data Warehouse** blade, create an Azure SQL Data Warehouse with the following settings:

    - Database name: **Warehousexx**, where **xx** are your initials.

    - Subscription: the name of the subscription you are using in this lab

    - Resource group name: **awrgstudxx**, where **xx** are your initials.
    - Server: **SQLServicexx**

    - Performance Level: **Gen2 DW100C**

    - Select Source: In **Additional setting** tab, under data source, click **Sample**


1. In the **SQL Data Warehouse*** blade, click **Create**.

   > **Note**: The provision will takes approximately 7 minutes.

### Task 2: Configure the Server Firewall

1. In the Azure portal, in the blade, click **Resource groups**, and then click **awrgstudxx**, and then click on **awdlsstudxx**, where **xx** are your initials

1. Click on **sqlservicexx**, where **xx** are your initials.

1. In the **sqlservicexx** screen, click on **Firewalls and virtual networks**.

1. In the sqlservicexx - Firewalls and virtual networks screen, click on the option **+ Add client IP**, and then click on **Save**.

    > **Note**: You will receive a message stating that the the server firewall rules have been successfully updated

> **Result**: After you completed this exercise, you have created an Azure SQL Data Warehouse instance and configures the server firewall to enable connections against it.

## Exercise 3: Creating an Azure SQL Data Warehouse

Estimated Time: 25 minutes

Individual exercise

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Install SQL Server Management Studio and connect to a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. Create a SQL Data Warehouse database

1. Create SQL Data Warehouse tables

    > **Note**: If you are not familiar with Transact-SQL, statements are available for the following labs in the following location **Allfiles\Labfiles\Starter\DP-200.5\SQL DW Files**

### Task 1: Install SQL Server Management Studio and connect to a SQL Data Warehouse instance.

1. In the Azure Portal, in the **sqlservicexx - Firewalls and virtual networks**, in the blade, click on **Properties**

1. Copy the **"Server name"** and paste it into Notepad.

1. Download [SQL Server Management Studio](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssms/download-sql-server-management-studio-ssms?view=sql-server-2017) and install onto your machine

1. On the windows desktop, click on the **Start**, and type **"SQL Server"** and then click on **MIcrosoft SQL Server Management Studio 17**

1. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, fill in the following details
    - Server Name: **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net**
    - Authentication: **SQL Server Authentication**
    - Username: **xxsqladmin**
    - Password: **P@ssw0rd**

1. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, click **Connect** 

### Task 2: Create a SQL Data Warehouse database.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**. 

1. In the query window, create a DataWarehouse database named **DWDB**, with a service objective of DW100 and a maximum size of 1024GB.

    ```SQL
    CREATE DATABASE DWDB COLLATE SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS
    (
        EDITION 			= 'DataWarehouse'
    ,	SERVICE_OBJECTIVE 	= 'DW100C'
    ,	MAXSIZE 			= 1024 GB
    );
    ```

    > **Note**: The creation of the database takes approximately 2 minutes.

1. In the **awdlsstudxx** blade, click on **Access keys**, and then clilck on the copy icon next to the **Storage account name** and paste it into Notepad.

### Task 3: Create SQL Data Warehouse tables.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**.

    >**Note**: If you are unfamiliar with Transact-SQL, there is a script in the Allfiles\Solution\DP-200.5\folder named **Exercise3 Task3Step2 script.sql**. It contains the bulk of the code required to create the tables, but you do have to complete the code by selecting the distribution type to use for each table. Make sure, when you execute it, to change the context to the DWDB database, otherwise you will get errors when executing. 

1. Create a table named **dbo.Users** with a **clustered columnstore** index with a distribution of **replicate** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | userId | int | NULL|
    | City | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Region | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Country | nvarchar(100) | NULL|

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**. Change the execution context for the Query to DWDB database.

1. Create a table named **dbo.Products** with a **clustered columnstore** index with a distribution of **round robin** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | ProductId | int | NULL|
    | EnglishProductName | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Color | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | StandardCost | int | NULL|
    | ListPrice | int | NULL|
    | Size | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Weight | int | NULL|
    | DaysToManufacture | int | NULL|
    | Class | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Style | nvarchar(100) | NULL|

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**. Change the execution context for the Query to DWDB database.

1. Create a table named **dbo.FactSales** with a **clustered columnstore** index with a distribution of **Hash** on the **SalesUnit** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | DateId | int | NULL|
    | ProductId | int | NULL|
    | UserId | int | NULL|
    | UserPreferenceId | int | NULL|
    | SalesUnit | int | NULL|

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, click on **Execute**.

> **Result**: After you completed this exercise, you have installed SQL Server Management Studio to create a data warhouse named DWDB and three tables named Users, Products and FactSales.

## Exercise 4: Using PolyBase to Load Data into Azure SQL Data Warehouse

Estimated Time: 10 minutes

Individual exercise

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Collect Azure Blob container and key details

1. Create a dbo.Dates table using PolyBase from Azure Blob


### Task 1: Collect Azure Blob account name and key details

1. In the Azure portal, click on **Resource groups** and then click on **awrgstudxx**, and then click on **awsastudxx** where xx are the initials of your name.

1. In the **awsastudxx** screen, click **Access keys**. Click on the icon next to the **Storage account name** and paste it into Notepad.

1. In the **awsastudxx - Access keys** screen, under **key1**, Click on the icon next to the **Key** and paste it into Notepad.

### Task 2: Create a dbo.Dates table using PolyBase from Azure Blob

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in Object Explorer, right click **sqlservicexx.database.windows.net** and click on **New Query**.

1. Create a **master key** against the **DWDB** database.

    ```SQL
    CREATE MASTER KEY;
    ```

1. Create a database scoped credential named **AzureStorageCredential** with the following details:
    - IDENTITY: **MOCID**
    - SECRET: **The access key of your storage account**

    ```SQL
    CREATE DATABASE SCOPED CREDENTIAL AzureStorageCredential
    WITH
    IDENTITY = 'MOCID',
    SECRET = 'Your storage account key'
;
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight both statements and then click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in code that will create an external data source named **AzureStorage** for the Blob storage account and data container created in with a type of **HADOOP** that makes use of the ****AzureStorageCredential**

    ```SQL
    CREATE EXTERNAL DATA SOURCE AzureStorage
    WITH (
        TYPE = HADOOP,
        LOCATION = 'wasbs://data@awsastudxx.blob.core.windows.net',
        CREDENTIAL = AzureStorageCredential
    );
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in code that will create an external file format named **TextFile** with a formattype of **DelimitedText** and a filed terminator of **comma**.

    ```SQL
    CREATE EXTERNAL FILE FORMAT TextFile
    WITH (
        FORMAT_TYPE = DelimitedText,
        FORMAT_OPTIONS (FIELD_TERMINATOR = ',')
    );
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight the statement and then click on **Execute**.

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in code that will create an external table named **dbo.DimDate2External** with the **location** as the root file, the Data source as **AzureStorage**, the File_format of **TextFile** with the following columns:

    | column name | data type | Nullability|
    |-------------|-----------|------------|
    | Date | datetime2(3) | NULL|
    | DateKey | decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | MonthKey | decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | Month | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Quarter | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Year | decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | Year-Quarter | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Year-Month | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Year-MonthKey | nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | WeekDayKey| decimal(38, 0) | NULL|
    | WeekDay| nvarchar(100) | NULL|
    | Day Of Month| decimal(38, 0) | NULL|

    ```SQL
    CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE dbo.DimDate2External (
	[Date] datetime2(3) NULL,
	[DateKey] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[MonthKey] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[Month] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Quarter] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Year] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[Year-Quarter] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Year-Month] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Year-MonthKey] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[WeekDayKey] decimal(38, 0) NULL,
	[WeekDay] nvarchar(100) NULL,
	[Day Of Month] decimal(38, 0) NULL
    )
    WITH (
        LOCATION='/',
        DATA_SOURCE=AzureStorage,
        FILE_FORMAT=TextFile
    );
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight the statement and then click on **Execute**.

1. Test that the table is created by running a select statement against it

    ```SQL
    SELECT * FROM dbo.DimDate2External;
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in a **CTAS** statement that creates a table named **dbo.Dates** with a **columnstore** index and a **distribution** of **round robin** that loads data from the **dbo.DimDate2External** table.

    ```SQL
    CREATE TABLE dbo.Dates
    WITH
    (   
        CLUSTERED COLUMNSTORE INDEX,
        DISTRIBUTION = ROUND_ROBIN
    )
    AS
    SELECT * FROM [dbo].[DimDate2External];
    ```

1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, highlight the statement and then click on **Execute**.
 
1. In **SQL Server Management Studio**, in the Query window, type in a query that creates statistics on the **DateKey**, **Quarter** and **Month** column.

    ```SQL
    CREATE STATISTICS [DateKey] on [Dates] ([DateKey]);
    CREATE STATISTICS [Quarter] on [Dates] ([Quarter]);
    CREATE STATISTICS [Month] on [Dates] ([Month]);
    ```

1. Test that the table is created by running a select statement against it

    ```SQL
    SELECT * FROM dbo.Dates;
    ```
